Secretary of State
Tony Blinken added a surprise
start to his already packed schedule
to the Middle East.
He was in Iraq earlier today.
Let's get some perspective
now from former
Ambassador John Bolton, Donald Trump's
national security adviser.
Ambassador Bolton,
thanks very much for being with us.
What's your view at this point
on this idea of a humanitarian pause
in Gaza
that the Biden administration
has been talking about?
That is not something that Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu wants to hear about,
but it goes slightly towards
where the Arab leaders
want in the region.
They want a cease fire,
but the Biden administration
is not quite on board with that just yet.
Is a humanitarian pause
something in the middle
that that should be
pursued at this point?
No, I think this is very serious.
I think
the Biden administration
is sliding away from its support
of Israel.
I think nobody's taken into account
how Hamas and
its puppet
masters in Tehran really are manipulating
public opinion
in the United States and elsewhere.
This is a very serious matter
that's going on here.
And there is no connection
between what Israel is doing
in the northern part of the Gaza Strip
and opening the border
for proper shipments of humanitarian aid.
This is a problem
Hamas has caused on both sides,
letting the aid in
and letting people out
who want to get out.
So I think Israel is entirely
justified here
in saying
Hamas is so utterly untrustworthy
that they don't
get the benefit of a humanitarian pause
and certainly not a cease fire.
But what about these
civilian casualties in Gaza
that are on the rise of ambassador
as the Israeli military
keeps hitting these these Hamas targets?
They are
killing a lot of civilians there.
I mean, we've seen some of the video.
You've seen some of the video
just leaving massive craters
and some very densely populated areas.
Children are being killed.
Hospitals are being
flooded with patients.
If you were in the position
of national security adviser right now,
would you at least privately say
to the Israelis
that they should be more selective
in their targeting? What do you think?
Well,
I think you have to
think there's evidence
they're not being selective.
You know, the moral question here
basically centers on who is responsible
for these civilian casualties.
And the answer is Hamas.
They're the ones that have weaponized
the entire Gaza
Strip over a 15 year period
where Israel hasn't even been present.
They're the ones that put
their own civilian population
in jeopardy.
And it would be a cruel irony here
if the group
that committed the atrocities on October
the seventh
by committing further atrocities
is of endangering its own population,
somehow is allowed to skate free.
I would call that the terrorists veto
what Israel is doing
and it's always subject to qualification.
But is picking legitimate
military targets,
what information tells
it are
legitimate military targets,
which it is entitled to do
in the exercise of its self-defense.
It's not entitled to target civilians,
civilians.
It's picking
it says it's picking Logitech
at military targets.
And it's made the decision to
to try and get all civilian casualties
minimized by giving advance warning
and has made the judgment
which international law
permits in armed conflict
that the military target
is sufficiently serious to justify
the tragic risk of civilian casualties.
And unless somebody can say
they're doing something else,
they are entitled
to do what they're doing.
And do you think the Israelis though,
need to at some point,
perhaps in the near future, make a more
of a transition to ground force,
ground forces
conducting house
by house, street by street
searches for Hamas leaders, as opposed to
these bombs
that some of this bombing
that has been going
on, these strikes,
these airstrikes that are going on
which can have
a pretty heavy civilian toll.
Well,
so so can house by
house, street by street conflict.
I think Israel,
both as a political matter
and as a moral matter,
is entitled to try and minimize
its own casualties.
I think this focus on on the situation
in Gaza
also obscures
what's really going on here, as
does all this talk about
not letting the conflict spread.
It has already spread.
Well, let's try and summarize
what's actually happening.
One of America's closest allies
is under multiple attacks
and threats of attacks
by a coalition of some of America's
greatest enemies.
Now, at least at the political level
and maybe more, including Russia,
this is extraordinarily serious.
This is not about the Gaza Strip.
This is about
the survival of Israel
and threats to the United States.
And I don't think the administration
either understands it
or is willing to admit it.
And I think that has
an extraordinarily negative impact
on our ability to resist this threat.
Let me ask you about this op
ed that you have in The New York Post.
You said President
Biden is risking
American lives by refusing
to hold Iran
responsible for the Hamas
attacks on October 7th.
I mean,
the president has been standing
pretty shoulder
to shoulder with the Israelis.
I know you've acknowledged that,
but do you really want a war with Iran?
Is that is that the right approach here?
I don't think it's
a question of what we want.
I think it's a question of what
Iran wants.
I think there's no doubt here
that Iran has called the shots
from the beginning.
We don't know
what their full strategy is.
But but the
the center of this conflict
is with the mullahs in Tehran.
The administration has said
that they won't tolerate
attacks on American personnel
by Iranian surrogates, terrorist groups
in Iraq or elsewhere.
And yet the attacks have continued.
Biden has drawn a red line and the.
And it's disappearing
right in front of us.
I think that does endanger
American lives.
Across the region.
We're not talking about
some kind of military option
when it comes to Iran right now. Are you?
Of course I am.
If if Iranian surrogate groups
kill Americans,
the Iranians need to pay a price for it.
They don't take our restraint
as a goodwill gesture.
Jim they take it as weakness.
Right.
But
knowing what you know about
the experience
of the Bush administration
with the Iraq war, the war on terrorism,
launching a war against Iran,
entering into a military conflict
with the Iranians, obviously,
obviously is going
to have major consequences in the region.
Look, nobody wants it.
Israel didn't start this.
We didn't start this.
It's Israel that's under attack now.
It's Americans in the region
that are under attack.
How many are going to be put at risk?
We've been very lucky.
I would have to say
some of the Shia groups in Iraq or
are incompetent
would be a polite way to put it.
And we haven't had a serious
loss of American life.
We've had some and some wounded.
But the day could come
when we would see
significant American casualties
as a result of the actions
of Iran's surrogates done absolutely
with their knowledge
and probably direction
So what do you do then, Jim?
You just say it's too bad, isn't it
too bad?
Yeah. Let me ask you this. I mean,
that's obviously
would you have got to go there?
That's what you're
talking about, a hypothetical.
Would you retaliate?
I mean, sure it is.
That's right.
But it could happen tomorrow.
Obviously, that
raises a whole set of issues.
And obviously war options
would be on the table.
And in a situation
like that, as you know, Ambassador,
any American president
would look at those options
in that kind of situation.
Let me ask you a couple
of political questions.
The new House
speaker, Mike
Johnson, has been tying
aid to Israel to cutting funds
for the IRA.
Do you agree with that?
Look, I think that's something
that Republicans should be doing more of.
I would certainly
vote in favor of whatever
aid Israel needs,
but I think we've got to make
some choices
reducing domestic
expenditures, domestic
welfare expenditures,
wasteful domestic spending.
I think the idea that the tying
the aid to something
that is unpalatable to the president
may help get the aid to Israel.
These are legislative tactics,
but I don't see any reason not to be more
aggressive in that sense.
All right.
Ambassador John Bolton, thanks
very much for your time.
We appreciate it. Glad to be with.